Hey everyone and thanks for jumping back
into the cryptoverse.
Today, we're going to talk about Bitcoin
and we're going to be discussing
time-based capitulation.
If you guys like the content, make sure
you subscribe to the channel, give the
video a thumbs up, and also check out
the sale on Into the Cryptoverse Premium
at intothecryptoverse.com.
The sale is ending soon.
Let's go ahead and jump in.
Bitcoin's currently trading at around
$63,000.
I'm recording this video on June 11th.
It'll probably not go live for a few
days cuz I'm going to be traveling, but
just for reference, that's where we are
right now.
Price-based capitulation is one thing.
Time-based capitulation
is another.
And the argument that I have made this
year
is that time-based capitulation is
actually more important than price-based
capitulation.
Be that as it may, if you were to get
some type of price-based capitulation
where all the on-chain indicators fully
reset, then I think it would make sense
to defer to price-based capitulation.
But unless that happens,
time-based capitulation, I think makes a
lot more sense to follow.
What I mean by that is that in a lot of
these prior bear markets,
Bitcoin
was going down for approximately 1 year,
okay?
You have
December
of 2017
to December
2018.
You have November
to or sorry, November 2021
to November 20
22.
So,
the point is that the last two midterm
year bear markets lasted approximately 1
year.
Now,
the bear market before that, it was
November 2013
to January 2014.
So, in this case, it lasted a little
more than a year.
However, I would point out that the high
that occurred was like at the very end
of November, like almost like early
December, and then the low was pretty
early on in January. So,
if you would actually take sort of like
a a date range from the high,
let's see when the high was.
So, it would have been the week of
November 25th to the low, it was about
59 weeks.
And if you look at, say, December 2017
to December 2018,
it was about, you know,
53 weeks, right? And then the next one
was about
I think it went all the way over there,
it's about 54 weeks. We're currently
about week 35.
So, I'm not saying that it can't bottom
sooner than the end of the year.
I'm just saying that history shows us
that the bear markets take about 50 to
60 weeks to play out when the bear
market's happened.
Now, we actually have an example though
where a bear market played out in a
shorter time frame. And that bear market
was in fact the 2019 into 2020 bear
market, which I have in fact talked
about a lot, and I've made this
comparison
to this bull market followed by the bear
to this one over here.
Now, what we'll never know is what would
have happened to Bitcoin back in 2020
had we not had the pandemic?
What would happen? Would it have
gone like this? Like maybe it would have
consolidated more, eventually came down
here.
And then gone up?
We don't know.
Because what happened is we got a
price based capitulation.
Where it essentially reset
all of the on-chain indicators.
Let me give you an example.
If you were to look at things like the
realized price
and the terminal price, you can see that
Bitcoin falls below those at the end of
every bear market. Now in 2019-2020,
it was trending down after that
non-euphoric top, the post-apathetic top
digestion phase.
And you could have argued that maybe we
would have had time-based capitulation.
But instead, we had price-based
capitulation where it fully reset the
on-chain indicators.
In fact, the Bitcoin supply in profit or
loss
also crossed in 2020. So,
you can have an idea or a thesis on how
long something will take to play out.
But if you were to get a price-based
capitulation, then I think it makes
sense to pivot sooner.
If you were to compare the current bear
market to the one in 2019-2020, you can
see what I'm saying.
If Bitcoin were to capitulate
in June, the same way that it did in
March of 2020, then it wouldn't make
sense in my opinion to stay bearish
until October. It just wouldn't.
But if we just continue to put in
slightly lower highs and slightly lower
lows, which is kind of what we've been
doing for this year, and if you look at
that had 2026 and compare that to the
average of prior midterm years and
overlay one standard deviation over that
average, you can see that right now
Bitcoin is uh down about as much as it
normally is at this point in midterm
years.
On average.
So, it's hard to know which way we're
going to go. Do we get a big
capitulation
that allows all the on-chain indicators
to reset
and justifies not having to wait until
October?
There is an example of that in history,
even with the S&P 500. If you look in
1960s,
I think it was uh
from memory 1962,
you can see there was a big capitulation
by the stock market
in the in the summer, into July or
yeah, June, and then the October low
was a higher low.
So, I would argue there's a chance that
you'll have a low around that time frame
in Q4,
and it'll probably be a lower low,
but if Bitcoin were to get a big drop
sooner,
then you could justify pivoting
sooner.
I put out a video recently talking about
the risk metric, right? And how I use it
to navigate crypto.
But one of the things I was very adamant
about this cycle was that we likely
would not go to the euphoric
stages because we were seeing retail
leave crypto rather than come to crypto.
And so, when I was looking at it last
year, I'm like, "Look, this to me it
looks like a a larger version of what
happened in the 2019 bear market."
And because of that,
instead of waiting for Bitcoin to go all
the way up to the higher risk bands, I
used time-based
analysis rather than price-based. So, it
was more like, "Hey, we just ran out of
time
to go to these euphoric levels." In
2019, we did not run out of time because
the four-year cycle like that that post
that apathetic top occurred in the
middle of the four-year cycle. But in
this cycle, the apathetic top occurred
at the end of the four-year cycle. So
the reason I became very bearish on
Bitcoin late last year, it was not
because the euphoric rallies happened.
It was not because all the indicators
were going off. In fact, if you were to
go back and look at the the terminal
price chart that has the realized price
and balance price, you'll see that
Bitcoin did not go above the terminal
price, which is where it goes during
euphoric rallies. It only went part of
the way up there like 2019.
So
my best guess as to what is happening
right now, and I know this has come
uh you know, a lot of people have not
liked this view, but I have to be honest
like I feel like at this point it is the
only view that has sort of stood the
test of time, one of the only views. I
think there's a few other people out
there that have had similar types of
views based on other things, but it is
one of the only views that has stood the
test of time that this was a apathetic
top, no rotation into altcoins, Bitcoin
topped 2 months before QT ended like
2019, and in 2025, the Fed cut rates
three times in 2019, the Fed cut rates
three times in 2025. It just happens to
be that the post apathetic top digestion
phase happens to line up with the
mid-term year bear market. And so you
can look at a chart like this, the
comparison of 2019, and say, all right,
maybe the bear market will only last 9
months. And you could be right, right?
But my guess as what's going to happen
is Bitcoin will find a low in June,
rally in July, and then people are going
to be saying, well, it doesn't need to
go for a full year because we didn't
have a euphoric rally. That that is kind
of what I see being the bix, the the
next big debate.
The problem is that when it happened in
2020, it was price-based capitulation.
So, I would be in that camp if Bitcoin
had price-based capitulation. If all the
on-chain indicators reset,
then I don't think it would make sense
to stay bearish into Q4.
But,
I defer to time-based capitulation
until that happens.
One thing that I I've sort of talked
about a little bit in prior bear
markets, and I'm not Honestly, I'm not
really that sure if it's going to play
out like that this time, but if you look
at the volume
of of Bitcoin, and I'll probably do a
video on this uh at some point. If you
look at the volume, a lot of times when
Bitcoin bottoms, it's like the volume
hits a wall. Like it's kind of going up
and it hits this big wall
where a lot of volume comes in, people
capitulate, and then that marks the low.
You can see that also happened in 2018,
right? Volume was trending down, and
then you get a massive spike.
And in 2014, right? Volume was trending
down, and then you get a massive spike.
Volume's trending down. That's not
really that massive of a spike compared
to the other ones. But, the counterpoint
is you have to have that
uh in a post-apathetic top bear market.
And the only example we have is 2019,
and we did get it, and it occurred
during the pandemic.
So, unfortunately, this is one of those
things where if you want to try to be
very smart about it, right? You could
just be like, "Well, you know, like why
do we have to have a pandemic-style end
to the bear market?" And I'm not saying
that we do, but what I am saying is that
literally every example of every bear
market that Bitcoin has ever had, it it
it hasn't actually ended until you get a
big spike in volume.
And so, I'm going to keep following
time-based capitulation, which would
entail Bitcoin finding a low probably
sometime later this year. It could be
October would be my base case, but I
it's not like it can't be
plus or minus sometime around that. And
I think as an investor, it makes sense
to pivot if the market does something
that you're not expecting. So, if the
market were to absolutely nuke into
June, let's say we get a big drop by
Bitcoin,
and it goes down another $20,000,
then I don't know that it would make
sense to stay bearish into October. It
probably wouldn't. But, if Bitcoin holds
support at say 60k,
like it did back in 2018, just held
support at 6k, you had a low in
February, you swept the low in June.
This cycle the same thing, a low in
February, you sweep the low in June. If
that happens, I still have to be
open-minded to a final drop in Q4 that
comes on surging volume, and that would
likely be accompanied by a drop in the
stock market, because the stock market
often gets a drop in the second half of
midterm years.
If this plays out like the year-to-date
ROI average, then what would essentially
happen is Bitcoin might go a little
lower in 2026, right? If you look at
2026 and compare that to the average of
prior midterm years, uh you can see
that, you know, if Bitcoin were to go a
little lower, let's say it goes a little
lower around the time the Bank of
England raises rates, which is coming
up. If it were to go lower, that might
make me question a little bit if the
June low is in, but I would have to see
if the on-chain indicators reset. You
know, if Bitcoin were to go to 54k, we
would go below the realized price. We
still would not be below the balance
price, and I'm not yet [clears throat]
sure if the NVRVZ score would be fully
reset.
But,
this is more of a time-based thing.
Every time the supply of Bitcoin and
profit and loss crossed,
the low in the market occurred within 1
to 4 months.
So, it crossed in June.
And last cycle, it first crossed in June
and the low came in November.
The cycle before that, it first crossed
in November and the low came in
December, only 1 month later. In 2014,
they crossed in September and then the
low was in January. So, October,
November, December, so that was 4
months. And then in 2011, they crossed
in September and then the low ended up
being uh on the daily anyways, it ended
up being in November. So, a few months
later.
So,
time-based capitulation
is more important. And that could go the
other way, too. If Bitcoin is holding
60K throughout all of Q4, then maybe
that is the low. But, I still would
argue that you would have to go through
that time-based thing and basically be
like 2018, but instead of getting the
final drop, we rally back up.
But again,
we can't say that right now because we
just simply haven't gone through enough
of the midterm year to justify making
that proclamation. Because of where we
are in the midterm year, we know that,
you know, Bitcoin often finds lows in
June. It'll often rally kind of early in
the summer. And and then
sort of come back down as we get into
the end of the year and then that marks
the time-based capitulation.
If I had waited for, you know, for
Bitcoin
risk to hit the euphoric levels at the
end of last year, then I just simply
would have completely missed the bear
market. But, I deferred to the
time-based view of Bitcoin's bull
markets because I think the time-based
view can often be more powerful than the
price-based view. But, anytime you get a
massive rally, you don't wait around.
And I've always said this, never let a
good bubble go to waste.
In 2021, by the time Bitcoin hit 58k,
according to the risk metric, I had
already sold 87% of my Bitcoin. Now, at
the time, I felt like a complete idiot
because, you know, Bitcoin went all the
way up to 58k in February,
right? It was like right here like
February-March time frame. I had sold
87%.
And then the market just continued to go
up, and everyone was screaming it was
going to 300k. People were dunking on me
left and right, and then later that
summer,
the market melted back down. And not
everything went back up to all-time
highs. Some of the things did. Uh
Bitcoin only barely swept it. So,
you have to consider that
deferring to time-based views makes
sense, meaning I'm going to sell
Bitcoin, you know, in Q4 of the
post-halving years, and everyone always
gives me a hard time about it,
right? But then it I mean it worked out.
I don't I don't fault myself for for
doing that because by having that money
in other markets this year, it's done a
lot better.
And I get I know that a lot of people
don't agree with that, but because
they're like, "Well, you just buy buy
good assets and hold it forever." And
that's what I do for most of my
portfolio. Like I buy index funds and I
don't sell them. I buy stocks and I
don't sell them. I buy like a lot of
precious metals and I tend to not sell
them that often.
But with crypto, there is this cadence
that has existed for so long, and I
don't really like sitting down through
70 to 80% drops in the market. Like I
just I don't like dealing with that. And
I do still have some Bitcoin, and I
think it actually makes sense to start
accumulating here as as we put in the
June low, but there's a reason why, I
mean, I've I've gone through enough of
these bear markets to be like, "You know
what? I'd rather I'd rather sit out and
avoid some of these losses if I can."
The biggest mistake people make though
is they sell and they never buy back.
And I'm saying usually the time to start
getting back into the market for Bitcoin
is right after that June low, then
accumulation
through the end of the midterm year even
as price goes lower often works out the
best. Don't be the guy that sold late
last year and then you never buy back
and then you're like sitting here like
wondering you thinking you just would
have been better off had you not sold.
Yeah, if you're never going to buy back
you would have been better off had you
not sold.
So there's that consideration to make as
well.
So I do believe that time based
capitulation is the more important thing
right now, not price based. But if we
were to get price based capitulation,
then it would makes it would make sense
to pivot and say you know what?
Time based capitulation is good, but if
the all if all the on-chain indicators
reset,
I wouldn't stay bearish any longer.
So that's the video for today. Time
based capitulation versus price based
capitulation. Hopefully this makes some
sense. You guys like the content, make
sure you subscribe to the channel, give
the video a thumbs up. And again, check
out the sale on Into The Cryptoverse
Premium at intothecryptoverse.com.
Also, we are going to be throwing the
first ITC conference later this year,
probably in November. And if you are
interested in that, I will put a link
down in the description below. You can
go put in your email, it's right here,
the Benjamin Cowen website conference
tab. Put in your email if you want to
get updates about it as we as we receive
them. Thank you guys for tuning in and
I'll see you next time. Bye.